##Nikola Tesla
###The Mad Scientist that was ahead of his time



---
During the late nineteenth century, homes were lit with kerosene lamps, factories ran on steam, and trains were fueled by coal.
But for one man, the smell of a second industrial revolution was in the air. Nikola Tesla was one of the brightest men of his generation, and envisioned a new and revolutionary modern world, all powered by electricity.
He was neither the first man to think of this world, nor the last, but his ideas and inventions have shaped how electricity is created, distributed, and consumed by everyone to this day.
His invention of the alternating current motor paved the way for widespread use of AC electricity - something that was marketed by Thomas Edison as dangerous and deadly. 
After inventing the tools, Tesla still had to prove to the public they worked. Westinghouse Co. and Tesla were selected to light the World's Colombian Exposition at Chicago in 1893, proving that AC could be used safely on a large scale. The power generators at Niagara Falls were the first prototype of a large scale AC power generation system, and tested the theories of long distance energy distribution. 
After proving his inventions worked, Tesla's ideas and inventions have lived on, and enrich every life on the planet. In addition to a global AC electricity grid, Tesla's inventions have paved the way for new technologies, such as modern electric cars. Elon Musk spearheaded the electric vehicle market with the founding of Tesla Motors, a car company that uses AC motors in their vehicles.
All in all Nikola Tesla's inventions had a trmendous impact on the advent of electricity use for the masses, and continues
to do so.

###Alternating Current Motor
####Tesla's ideas are revolutionary - literally.
Tesla's AC motor was the most critical component in the creation of an AC power grid. In the early 1890s, Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla were feuding over what type of current to use, Edison's DC or Tesla's AC. Edison's DC power was already in use in some parts of New York City, lighting homes and businesses. However it did come with the notable drawback of the need to have power stations about every mile[2]. The power stations were required because the DC electricity could only be transmitted at a low voltage, resulting in great power loss in the transmission lines as it travelled farther from the power station. There was a better way to transmit power, however, and that was with AC. The voltage could be 'stepped up' with the use of a transformer, and reduce energy losses over the transmission lines[4]. With significantly reduced physical restraints on an AC system, electricity can spread farther and faster than it ever could have with a DC electrical grid. This means that electricity now has the means to travel to smaller cities, rural, and remote areas, cost effectively. But Edison was not going to accept defeat easily, and fearing that his investments in DC could be all for nothing, he started a smear campaign against AC. He campaigned that AC was dangerous and leathal, but DC was safe to use at residences and businesses. As Westinghouse recalled, Edison's campaign was a bruital attack against Tesla and Westinghouse.

"I remember Tom [Edison] telling them that direct current was like a river flowing peacefully into the sea, while alternating current was like a torrent rushing violently over a precipice. Imagine that! Why they even had a professor named Harold Brown who went around talking to audiences... and electrocuting dogs and old horses right on stage, to show how dangerous alternating current was." [5]

In spite of Edison's campaign against Tesla and Westinghouse, he was unsuccessful in defeating Tesla
Tesla's AC motor was a critical component in bringing the more efficient AC power grid to life, because it was the most effective method capable of generating the AC electricity required for a full scale power grid across the United States and the world[2]. Tesla was able to test his theory of an AC power grid at the World's Colombian Exposition, and AC generation with his motor for the first time on a large scale at Niagara Falls.


###World's Colombian Exposition and Niagara Falls
####Tesla's proven right
In 1893 the Westinghouse company, along with Tesla were commissioned to light the World's Colombian Exposition in Chicago[1]. On May 1, 1893, 100,000 incandescent light bulbs were lit up at the flip of a switch, and all the lights were powered by a dozen thousand-horsepower AC generators.[5] This exposition was the first large display of an AC powered electrical system, and it went flawlessly for Tesla. One of the visitors of the exposition was Lord Kelvin, a famous British physicist who was the head of the International Niagara Falls Comission. This commission was responsible for the electrification of Niagara Falls, and it has solicited proposals from around the world, but it had rejected them all [6]. A few months after visiting the World's Colombian Exposition, and seeing the massive display of a working AC electricity system, Kelvin sought Tesla and Westinghouse to construct the generation system at Niagara Falls [6]. Within three years, on November 16, 1896, construction reached a point where the generators were operating, and electricity was transmitted to Buffalo, NY [6]. Eventually, a few more years later, all of the ten planned generators were online, and were generating electricity for use in New York City - where everything was starting to be powered by electricity, from Broadway to the subway. The Niagara Falls power plant would also lead the way for large scale power generation across the globe[3]. The system was a massive success for Tesla, and Edison's former DC electrical grid in New York had met its demise - it was clear AC would be the future of electricity. 


###His Patents take a life of their own
####Tesla's legacy

In 1888 George Westinghouse purchased all of Tesla's AC related patents for approximately $200,000. After that year, Tesla's primary focus was making his own laboratory to conduct his experiments, but he was still involved in projects such as the World's Colombian Exposition, and Niagara Falls. His new ideas included the Tesla Coil, used in Radio and Television equipment, and he also experimented with lightning, but as he got older, his ideas started becoming more and more absurd. The patents and ideas before that time have far outlived Tesla himself. AC is still used around the world as the standard for electrical grids. His AC motor invention is used extensively throughout everyday things, electricity is generated with the use of them. Most electrical plants convert their energy source into heat, such as nuclear, natural gas, some types of solar, and incineration of trash, just to name a few. After the heat is generated, it is used to create steam, which then spins a turbine on an AC motor to generate electricity [2]. AC motors are used extensively in the transportation industry as well. Subways around the world use them to transport commuters in major cities around the world. Electric motor vehicle transportation has become more and more popular in the past decade. Elon Musk spearheaded this with the founding of Tesla Motors - an electric car company that exclusively makes electric cars. All of Tesla Motors' vehicles use AC motors to power the wheels. When Musk is asked why he founded an *electric* car company, he usually replies something like this: "Tesla’s mission is to accelerate the world’s transition to sustainable transport." why would Musk say that? As he said to Neil deGrasse Tyson: "If we know we have to get off oil no matter what, we know that is an inescapable outcome, why run this crazy experiment of changing the chemical composition of the atmosphere and oceans by adding enormous amounts of CO2 that have been buried since the Precambrian Era? That's crazy. That's the dumbest experiment in history, by far." Musk knows that gasoline and diesel aren't going to be around forever, so we might as well switch now, rather than later[7]. This is in line with Nikola Tesla's initial spirit, advancing humanity forward. His inventions have stood the test of time, and still dominate the electrical grid, and his ideas are still being used to move humanity forward in new ways.

###In Conclusion
Nikola Tesla was one of the brightest men of his time, and he led the worldwide adoption of electricity into daily life for billions of people. His invention of the AC motor enabled AC electricity to be generated efficiently and at a massive scale. His acheivements at the World's Colombian Exposition and Niagara falls cemented his ideas, and led to the international roll out of AC electricity generation and distribution. His inventions and ideas have far outlived Tesla himself - with electric transport enabling a new era of transportation. Tesla's inventions have truly changed the world.

